[MUSIC]
[似然值]
In this lecture we will
talk about likelihoods.
這段影片介紹的是似然值
Likelihoods are a way to express
the relative evidence for
似然值是兩個假說間的相對證據
one hypothesis over another hypothesis.
They can be very useful in themselves.
似然值很有用
But they are also underlying
a lot of Bayesian statistics,
至於藏身其中的貝氏統計學
as we'll see in later lectures.
我們下次再談
A likelihood gives you the function
of a parameter given the data.
似然值是資料參數的函數「L(θ)」
So when you've observed some data, you
can pull up the accompanying likelihood
從觀察資料中得出似然值函數
function and you can check how likely
each hypothesis that you might have is.
以評估不同假說的可能性
In this example, we mainly focus on
the binomial likelihood function.
以最簡化的情形，二項似然函數為例
This is the easiest situation.
It's like flipping a coin and
假設你擲硬幣數次
then counting the number of
heads that you have observed.
記下正面出現的次數
This is the binomial likelihood function.
這就是二項似然函數了
I won't explain it in detail here, but
在此我不說明細節
而是當成作業
there's an accompanying assignment in
which we dive into the function and
會請你以不同觀測值，計算出對應的似然值
calculate some likelihoods for different
of observations of number of heads.
會請你以不同觀測值，計算出對應的似然值
For now, let's take a look at the
situation where we flip a coin ten times.
讓我們瞧瞧擲硬幣10次的情形
Eight of these ten times we find
that the coin comes up heads.
其中有8枚硬幣正面朝上
We can calculate the likelihood of theta,
基於這些數據
我們已經可以計算θ的似然值了
and theta in this case is a Greek letter
that explains the true hypotheses.
但首先這裡的θ是什麼呢？
(1)是個代表真實假說的希臘字母(讀音theta)
And in this case we might assume that the
true underlying number of heads that we
(2)只要你擲夠多次硬幣，
觀察到的正面硬幣枚數比值
will observe if we do this
in the long run is 0.8.
(2)只要你擲夠多次硬幣，
觀察到的正面硬幣枚數比值
So for the theta of 0.8, we can
calculate that the likelihood is 0.30.
從θ=0.8得出
似然值=0.30
But we can also calculate the likelihoods
for all sorts of different hypotheses.
除了θ=0.8的情形，還可以假設更多情形
Let's say that you have the idea that
the true value of the number of coin flips
如果你認為只要你擲夠多次硬幣
觀察到的正面硬幣枚數的機率為70%
in the long run is 70% or a theta of 0.7.
或是稱作θ=0.8。你該怎麼計算它的似然值？
The likelihood for this being true,
based on the data that we have observed,
切記似然值基於我們的觀測數據
eight out of ten coin
flips turned up heads.
就是「擲10次硬幣出現8枚正面朝上」的情形
The likelihood of the true
population effect being 0.7 is 0.23.
據此，θ=0.7時
或然率=0.23
The likelihood of a theta of 0.6 is 0.12.
θ=0.6時
或然率=0.12
So you can see it becomes less and
它離你的觀察值(θ=0.8)越遠
less likely the farther away
you go from the observed data.
它的或然值也變得越小
Now these numbers are not very clear, so
到此我們已稍微有了數感
let's take a look at
the likelihood function.
接著來談談或然函數(likelihood function)吧
In this graph, you can see
the likelihood function plotted.
這場圖所描繪的是或然函數
On the vertical dimension of this graph,
we have plotted the likelihood.
縱軸，代表似然值
橫軸，代表θ
And on the horizontal dimension,
we have plotted theta.
縱軸，代表似然值
橫軸，代表θ
All different versions
ranging from 0 to 1.
數值介於0到1之間
So the range of 0 to 1 means that we
will either always observe heads or
不會出現「全是正面」或「毫無正面」的情形
we'll never observe heads.
Now based on the data we have collected,
we already know that
依據資料已知
it's not possible that we'll never observe
heads or we'll never observe tails.
不可能從不出現正面或或反面
Because eight out of ten
turned out to be heads.
所以正面或反面必定出現
So we've observed both values.
沒有極值(全正面或全反面)的情形
So the extremes are not possible, and
you can see that the likelihood here is 0,
所以極值的似然值等於0
it's very low.
The most likely true population parameter
of the number of coin flips based on
擲銅板的真母體參數值(θ)取決於數據
the data that we have is 0.8, because
this is exactly what we have observed.
觀察數據得出θ=0.8
So this is the maximum likelihood.
最大似然值便在θ=0.8時出現
(如圖)
Based on the data that
we have in our hands,
已知0.8是最可能的真母體參數值
we can see that 0.8 is the most
likely true population parameter.
由我們手邊的資料得知0.8是最可能的真母體參數值
But some of the values just around
it are also still quite plausible.
落在0.8附近的值也說得通
So a value of 0.6 is still quite
probable in this case as well.
例如θ=0.6也是蠻有可能的值
These types of likelihood curves
were invented by Ronald Fisher,
費雪（Ronald Fisher)發明了這種似然曲線(likelihood curves)
I already said he was a really,
really smart guy.
他真的是個天才
And he invented these likelihoods when he
was only 22 years old and actually a 3rd
年僅22歲的大三生就發明了似然值
year undergraduate student, so this sort
of testifies to his genius, I would say.
我認為這真的該歸為他的天分
Sometimes I wonder what have I been doing
the last couple of years, definitely
有時我捫心自問
我在大學畢業前能發明統計學的基石嗎？
not inventing something like this that's
a fundament of modern statistics.
絕不可能
Now we can use the likelihood
under the null hypothesis and
現在，我們可以用虛無假設的似然值
the likelihood under
the alternative hypothesis
以及對立假設的似然值
to calculate something that's
known as the likelihood ratio.
來計算似然值的比值(likelihood ratio)
So in the case of likelihood ratio,
we're taking the relative evidence for
the one hypothesis, the null,
and the other hypothesis,
the alternative, and we can calculate
the odds of one over the other.
Let's look at our example,
where we had eight out of ten coin flips.
Now we need to compare two hypotheses, and
you're free to choose any two
values of data that you want.
But one very logical value would be 50%,
0.5,
the hypothesis that this is
a perfectly balanced and fair coin.
So this is the value that's plotted
at 0.5 on the horizontal axis.
And you can compare this with any
hypothesis you had in advance.
The alternative hypothesis I've
chosen here is the value 0.8.
This happens to be exactly the value
that we've observed in the data.
Eight out of ten coin flips.
Now we're comparing this alternative
hypothesis that a true population
parameter is 0.8.
So 80% of the time this coin
will come up heads, and
we'll compare it to the null hypothesis,
the value of 0.5,
the idea that this is
a perfectly balanced, fair coin.
Now we can already see in the graph
that the likelihood is much
higher at 0.8 than it is at 0.5.
But what we want to know is,
how much more likely?
And the likelihood ratio
gives us an idea of this.
It's basically dividing the likelihood
at 0.8 by the likelihood at 0.5.
And in this case, this ratio is 6.87.
So it's quite more likely that
the true population barometer is
0.8 compared to the ID that
the population parameters 0.5.
Now we can test any values that we want.
Let say that in advance we still had
the same alternative hypothesis,
that this was a coin that would
come up heads 80% of the time.
We still compare it to the probability
that this is a fair coin.
So these two hypotheses are being
compared, but now we have observed data
where the coin comes up heads
four times out of ten flips.
So we can see the shape of the likelihood
function is very different, and
in this case of course,
based on the observed data,
the likelihood of 0.4 is most likely.
We can still compare the ratio of
the likelihoods at 0.5 and 0.8,
and now we see that the value of 0.5 is
much more likely than the value at 0.8.
So the hypothesis that this is a fair
coin is now much more likely than
the hypothesis that this
is an unfair coin, and
that the true population parameter is 0.8.
Now when you calculate likelihood ratios,
there are two cutoffs of 8 and
32 of these likelihood ratios which
are considered either moderately strong
evidence or strong evidence.
So in the previous examples, we could see
that in the first case, we had not yet
moderately strong evidence for
the difference in the hypotheses.
In the latter case, when we observed four
out of ten flips coming up heads, we can
see that this was very strong evidence for
the fair coin hypothesis compared to
the alternative, that this was a coin
with 0.8 coin flips coming up heads.
So you see that likelihoods
are relative evidence for
the alternative hypothesis
compared to the null hypothesis.
It's important to realize that both of
these hypotheses might be quite unlikely.
Let's look at an example.
Now here we flip the coin 100 times, and
50 out of the 100 times,
the coin came up heads.
Now, we are comparing two hypotheses here,
the one being that the true population
barometer is 30% heads in the long run,
so a theta of 0.3.
The alternative hypothesis is that
the true population barometer is at
theta of 0.8, so
we'll see 80% heads in the long run.
When we compare these two
hypotheses against each other,
we can see that the hypothesis that true
population parameter is 0.3 is massively
more likely than the likelihood that
the true population parameter is 0.8.
And we find a ridiculously
high likelihood ratio.
However, we can also see that
both these hypotheses are wrong.
So even though the relative evidence for
the one hypothesis compare to the other
hypothesis is extremely convincing, we
didn't find the true population parameter,
which is actually just 0.5 in this case.
So it's important to keep in mind that
likelihood ratios are relative evidence.
Now we can compare the likelihood under
the null hypothesis of a theta of 0.05 and
an alternative hypothesis of 0.8.
Now one way in which you can think about
applying these likelihood ratios is when
you think about the outcomes of studies.
Now, if you perform a study,
it's sort of like a coin flip.
You can either find a statistically
significant result, or not.
So this is one of two options,
and it's a binomial probability.
So how often will you find
a significant result, and
how often will you find
a non-significant result?
Well it depends on whether
the null hypothesis is true or
the alternative hypothesis is true.
When the null hypothesis is true,
we know that you'll find
a significant result that equals your
alpha level, which is typically 0.05%.
So this is a very good null hypothesis
in these likelihood ratios.
We can compare this with the probability
of finding significant results when
there is a true effect.
And in this case, this probability
depends on the statistical
power that you have in your test.
Let's for now put it at 0.8, so
80% of the time you'll find a significant
result because you had 80% power.
Now we can use the likelihood function
to compare the probability that we have
observed a significant result
under the null hypothesis, and
compare it with
the alternative hypothesis.
Let's say that we perform
three studies in a row.
Now there are a number of outcomes
that could happen, of course.
None of these studies
could come up significant.
You could find only one
significant effect, or two.
Or, if you're really lucky, three
significant results out of three studies.
Now let's calculate
the likelihood of finding two
out of three significant results.
When the null hypothesis is true,
this is pretty straightforward.
The probability of finding a significant
effect when there's no true effect
is the alpha level, so
this is 0.05% of the time.
We multiply it by two significant studies.
So 5% times 5%.
And then we multiply it by the probability
of finding no significant effect.
Well, if we have a 5% alpha level,
then the probability of finding
no significant effect, if there's
no true effect, is actually 95%.
So if you multiply these probabilities,
5% times 5% times 95%,
we get the value of 0.0024.
All right, so what happens if there
is a true effect to be observed, and
we find two out of three
significant findings?
Now let's assume that we have 80% power.
You never really know, but
you can check different levels of power in
the likelihood function when it's plotted.
But for now, let's take a look at 80%.
So we find two significant results and
one nonsignificant result.
If the alternative hypothesis is true,
this equals an 80% probability of finding
a significant result,
times an 80% probability of
finding a significant result, times a 20%
probability of making a type two error.
And if we now multiply these
probabilities, we get 0.128.
So we can calculate the relative
likelihood of observing this data,
two out of three significant results,
when either the null hypothesis is true,
or the alternative hypothesis is true.
Now based on these numbers, you can
already see that this outcome is much
more likely when there is a true effect
than when there is no true effect.
So, if we calculate likelihood ratio,
we see that it's actually
54 times more likely that
the alternative hypothesis is true than
that the null hypothesis this is true.
It's possible to find this pattern of
results when there is no true effect.
But it's massively more probable that
you'll find this pattern of results
when there is a true effect.
We can plot this likelihood function,
because you might not be convinced that
80% power is very likely in this case.
Now if you look at this graph, we can
again see the likelihood function which is
plotted for
two out of three significant results.
I've indicated two points,
the 0.05 theta on the left,
and the 0.8 theta on the right.
Now the 0.05 is the type one error rate,
or your alpha, so that's pretty fixed.
But maybe you feel like you might
have had lower power in your study.
And you can look at
the relative likelihood of
the outcome of two out of three studies
for any value of theta that you like.
The most probable situation, of course, is
that for exactly the result that we have
observed, two out of three
significant results, meaning 0.666.
For any of these values, you can see that
as long as you assume a decent level of
power, something higher than 0.5,
it's much more likely that there is a true
effect than that there is no true effect,
even though we only observed two out of
three statistically significant results.
Now this is an important realization that
you can get by looking at these likelihood
functions.
Multiple studies should give mixed results
when the alternative hypothesis is true.
And even when you have a decent level
of power, this will happen quite often.
What's the likelihood of finding
three significant results in a row
when you only have 80% power?
I'm saying only, but
that's actually a pretty decent and
recommended level of power, right?
So we can do the math, it's quite easy,
0.8 x 0.8 x 0.8 gives you
a likelihood of 0.51.
So about 50% of the time,
when you have 80% power and
the alternative hypothesis is true, you'll
find three significant results in a row.
It means that almost 50% of the time, you
will get some version of mixed results.
Either two out of three,
one out of three, or
if you're unlucky, even zero out of three.
Even though there might be a true effect.
Now this won't happen so often, but
all these outcomes are probable.
And the probability of mixed
result is almost 50% of the time.
So this is important to realize,
when you're doing lines of research,
you will not find consistently significant
results in all of your studies, and
this is perfectly fine.
This is exactly what you should expect.
Now in this graph I've plotted a lot
of lines that are relevant for
a situation where we perform four studies.
When we perform four studies, we can
either observe zero significant results,
or one, or two, or three, or four.
So each of these curves plots one
of these likelihood functions,
given the data that we've observed.
Now what I want to point out here is,
again, the massive probability
of finding mixed results.
And we can see this for
all the curves for one, two, three, or
four out of four results, where the
likelihood is highest for mixed results.
And that's actually this area.
So when we perform four studies, and the
theta, which means the power that we have,
is somewhere between 0.2 and 0.8,
so between 20% power and 80% power.
Then finding mixed results is actually the
most probable outcome of a line of four
studies.
Now we've seen that likelihood ratios
allow you to express the relative
evidence for the null hypothesis
compared to the alternative hypothesis.
And this can be very useful in itself.
For example, we applied this to
the probability of finding significant or
non-significant results
in a set of studies.
And we've seen that it's
actually quite likely
that you'll observe
a mix of significant and
non-significant results, even when
the alternative hypothesis is true.
Likelihoods also underlie
Bayesian statistics.
So knowing likelihoods is also
a good stepping stone to move on
to Bayesian statistics,
which we'll do in future lectures.
[MUSIC]